How to build a real time location tracker using leaflet js (#3977)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/how-to-build-a-real-time-location-tracker-using-leaflet-js/index.md

    alt: How to build a real time location tracker using leaflet.js Hero Image
---
**Geolocation** refers to the ID of the geographic location of a client or computing device employing an assortment of data collection systems. Most geolocation administrations use network routing addresses or inward GPS devices to decide this location. 
<!--more-->
Geolocation is a device explicit API. It implies that programs or devices would need to support geolocation to use it through web applications. 

HTML5 geolocation API feature assists website owners to have access to the geographic location(latitude and longitude) of each of their visitors. By this implementation, visitors have access to products or search results available to that location. 

A large number of websites use the HTML5 geolocation feature. Such as [_Spine-health_](https://www.spine-health.com/), a health and fitness blog in the united states. The role of `leaflet.js` here is to create easy map layers for a proper visual representation of the HTML5 geolocation feature.

### Prerequisites
To understand this guide properly, the reader should have prior knowledge on:

> - JavaScript. View the documentation [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript).

> - HTML (Hypertext Markup Language). View the documentation [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [HTML](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML).

> - CSS (Cascading Style Sheet). View the documentation [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/css)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [CSS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/css).
```

- Code editors like [_visual studio code_](https://code.visualstudio.com/download), [_sublime text_](https://www.sublimetext.com/3).
- Leaflet.js basics. [Here](https://www.section.io/engineering-education/building-simple-maps-using-leaflet-js/) is a guide on building simple maps using leaflet.js.

### Goal
This tutorial teaches readers how to build a real-time location tracker using the HTML5 geolocation API and leaflet to visualize the results. We will also guide the reader on how to add the location search plugin of leaflet.js. 

Thus by the end, the reader should be able to:
- Create an `OSM` layer.
- Make use of the HTML5 geolocation feature.
- Use the leaflet.js search plugin.

### Getting started
#### Creating an `OSM layer`

> An OSM layer or open street map layer is a collection of a free editable geographic database of the world. The sources include surveys and personal knowledge, street-level image data, and government data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An OpenStreetMap [OSM] layer is a collection of a free editable geographic database of the world. The sources include surveys and personal knowledge, street-level image data, and government data.

According to [wiki](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Featured_tile_layers), there are several `OSM` tile layers. Tile layers are a collection of web-accessible tiles that reside on a server. The tiles are accessible by a direct URL request from the server.

> We can go through the previous [leaflet.js](https://www.section.io/engineering-education/building-simple-maps-using-leaflet-js/) documentation for a clearer walkthrough on leaflet basics. In this section, we'd only be scratching the surface as much isn't required to add our `OSM` map layer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can go through the previous [leaflet.js](https://www.section.io/engineering-education/building-simple-maps-using-leaflet-js/) documentation for a clearer walkthrough on leaflet basics. In this section, we will only be scratching the surface as we are not required to add much to our `OSM` layer. 
```

Let's walk you through the processes:

- First, we will initialize our HTML.

```html
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <title>Document</title>
  </head>
  <body></body>
</html>
```

- Then, we would import the `leaflet.js` JavaScript and CSS file using its unique content delivery network (CDN).

```html
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <title>Document</title>
    <link
      rel="stylesheet"
      href="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.7.1/dist/leaflet.css"
      integrity="sha512-xodZBNTC5n17Xt2atTPuE1HxjVMSvLVW9ocqUKLsCC5CXdbqCmblAshOMAS6/keqq/sMZMZ19scR4PsZChSR7A=="
      crossorigin=""
    />
  </head>
  <body>
    <script
      src="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.7.1/dist/leaflet.js"
      integrity="sha512-XQoYMqMTK8LvdxXYG3nZ448hOEQiglfqkJs1NOQV44cWnUrBc8PkAOcXy20w0vlaXaVUearIOBhiXZ5V3ynxwA=="
      crossorigin=""
    ></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

> - Next, we would create a `div` with an `id` name. The `id` name can be anyone of your choice, but for the sake of this tutorial, we will use "map" as the `id` name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Next, we would create a `div` element with an `id` name. The `id` name can be any of your choice, but for the sake of this tutorial, we will use "map" as the `id` name.
 ```

```html
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <title>Document</title>
    <link
      rel="stylesheet"
      href="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.7.1/dist/leaflet.css"
      integrity="sha512-xodZBNTC5n17Xt2atTPuE1HxjVMSvLVW9ocqUKLsCC5CXdbqCmblAshOMAS6/keqq/sMZMZ19scR4PsZChSR7A=="
      crossorigin=""
    />
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="map"></div>
    <script
      src="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.7.1/dist/leaflet.js"
      integrity="sha512-XQoYMqMTK8LvdxXYG3nZ448hOEQiglfqkJs1NOQV44cWnUrBc8PkAOcXy20w0vlaXaVUearIOBhiXZ5V3ynxwA=="
      crossorigin=""
    ></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

> - In doing the above, we have been able to create a container for the `OSM` layer. We have to style the container to prevent the map layer not showing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- After doing the above, we will have created a container for the `OSM` layer. We have to style the container to prevent the map layer not showing.
 ```

    integrity="sha512-XQoYMqMTK8LvdxXYG3nZ448hOEQiglfqkJs1NOQV44cWnUrBc8PkAOcXy20w0vlaXaVUearIOBhiXZ5V3ynxwA=="
    crossorigin=""></script>
    <script>
        var map_init = L.map('map',{
            center: [9.0820, 8.6753],
            zoom:8
        });
        var osm = L.tileLayer ('https://{s}.tile.openstreetmap.org/{z}/{x}/{y}.png', {
            attribution: '&copy; <a href="https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright">OpenStreetMap</a> contributors'
        }).addTo (map_init);
    </script>
</body>
</html>
```

The above is our base layer and a visualization tool for other components to be added. For a better understanding, we will refer you to previous documentation on [leaflet.js](https://www.section.io/engineering-education/building-simple-maps-using-leaflet-js/).

#### Location search plugin
According to the [Google maps platform](https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/geocoding/overview), Geocoding is the process of converting addresses (like "1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA") into geographic coordinates (like latitude 37.423021 and longitude -122.083739), which you can use to place markers on a map or position the map. 

> We would be doing the opposite that is known as `Reverse geocoding`. Apps like [google maps](https://www.google.ng/maps) and [google earth](https://earth.google.com/web/) make use of reverse geocoding to make the location search feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will be doing the opposite that is known as `Reverse geocoding`. Apps like [google maps](https://www.google.ng/maps) and [google earth](https://earth.google.com/web/) make use of reverse geocoding to make the location search feature.
```

Reverse geocoding has been eased up by leaflet.js. Instead of going through an entire lengthy process of reverse geocoding, with the leaflet's unique CDN, it is limited to a small line of code. 

There are several leaflet.js [geocoding plugins](https://leafletjs.com/plugins.html#geocoding). We will be working with the [Leaflet Control Geocoder](https://github.com/perliedman/leaflet-control-geocoder) because of its extendable nature to other data providers. 

To get started, the steps below should be followed:

> - Import the leaflet control geocoder unique Content Delivery Network (CDN) into our `BASE` code above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Import the leaflet control geocoder unique content delivery network (CDN) into our `BASE` code above.
```

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/leaflet-control-geocoder/dist/Control.Geocoder.css" />
<script src="https://unpkg.com/leaflet-control-geocoder/dist/Control.Geocoder.js"></script>

```

> - Next we add the control below to our `BASE` code map instance above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Next, we add the control below to our `BASE` code map instance above.
```

}
```

`navigator.geolocation` is a global object that returns a geolocation object by the browser that gives web content access to the location of the device. Most browsers are geolocation enabled. 

Browsers like internet explorer only support HTML5 geolocation 9.0 and above. Therefore the aim of the conditional statement above is to handle such errors. 

The `getCurrentPosition` method gives the current geographic information of the device.

#### Getting geographic information

```js
var marker, circle, lat, long, accuracy;

function getPosition(position) {
  // console.log(position)
  lat = position.coords.latitude;
  long = position.coords.longitude;
  accuracy = position.coords.accuracy;

  if (marker) {
    map_init.removeLayer(marker);
  }

  if (circle) {
    map_init.removeLayer(circle);
  }

  marker = L.marker([lat, long]);
  circle = L.circle([lat, long], { radius: accuracy });

  var featureGroup = L.featureGroup([marker, circle]).addTo(map_init);

  map_init.fitBounds(featureGroup.getBounds());

  console.log(
    "Your coordinate is: Lat: " +
      lat +
      " Long: " +
      long +
      " Accuracy: " +
      accuracy
  );
}
```

> We earlier said that the callback method `getCurrentPosition` gives the current geographic location of users. To view this information's, we will "`console.log`" the function's argument. 

Reviewer: The second sentence here requires a word to make sense. Kindly check on it's readability.

The method `L.marker` embodies a marker object given a coordinate (longitude and latitude) while `L.circle` represents a circle object given a coordinate and an options object which contains the circle radius. `L.featureGroup` creates a Leaflet Feature Group that adds its child layers into a parent group when added to a map.

Lastly, we will need a `setInterval` method to call a function at specified intervals. The measurement is in milliseconds and the aim of using this method is to get the change in the users geographic location, thus, making a realtime tracker.

```js 
if (!navigator.geolocation) {
  console.log("Your browser doesn't support geolocation feature!");
} else {
  setInterval(() => {
    navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(getPosition);
  }, 5000);
}
```

> Finally, bringing all these components together, our final code is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, bringing all these components together, we will have our final code as:
```
